docs/magisterka.md, before:

---
title:
- Realizing computational complexity results
author:
- Paweł Balawender
date:
- April 10, 2025
# pandoc -t beamer magisterka.md -o magisterka.pdf --bibliography references.bib --citeproc  -M link-citations=true -V colortheme:crane -V theme:CambridgeUS --csl apa.csl
---
# Circuit Value Problem
- For a given single-tape, polynomial-time Turing machine `M` and input `x`, in [@Kozen2006], there is an explicit construction of a boolean circuit over (0, 1, `and`, `or`, `not`) (with fan-in 2 for `and`, `or` and 1 for `not`), with one output node, such that its value is 1 if and only if machine `M` accepts input `x`. The construction is in LOGSPACE. So CVP is P-complete w.r.t. LOGSPACE-reductions.
- This is a good example of a LOGSPACE-reduction, being a good benchmark for the LF programming language and for the circuit description language
- The problem is that we can't generate tests for it; we have no database of Turing machines descriptions

# Concrete Turing Machines
- How to obtain definitions of concrete Turing machines, with transitions stated explicitly etc.?
- Small deterministic Turing machines: [@KUDLEK1996241]
- Small universal Turing machines: [@ROGOZHIN1996215]
- Verified programming of Turing machines in Coq Forster: [@10.1145/3372885.3373816]
- Formalizing Turing machines: [@10.1007/978-3-642-32621-9_1]

# References {.allowframebreaks}

Commit message:

add dafny files, toposort from submodule, magisterka update

docs/magisterka.md, after:

---
title:
- Realizing computational complexity results
author:
- Paweł Balawender
date:
- April 10, 2025
# pandoc -t beamer magisterka.md -o magisterka.pdf --bibliography references.bib --citeproc  -M link-citations=true -V colortheme:crane -V theme:CambridgeUS --csl apa.csl
---
# Horn-satisfiability is P-complete
- https://github.com/mikolalysenko/horn-sat?tab=readme-ov-file
- Prolog should be able to do that?
- https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/171728/is-the-functional-circuit-value-problem-fp-complete
- Interesting: Implement Horn-SAT or CVP in Dafny!
- Use simple code for calculations and ghost functions to prove correctness!

# Circuit Value Problem
- For a given single-tape, polynomial-time Turing machine `M` and input `x`, in [@Kozen2006], there is an explicit construction of a boolean circuit over (0, 1, `and`, `or`, `not`) (with fan-in 2 for `and`, `or` and 1 for `not`), with one output node, such that its value is 1 if and only if machine `M` accepts input `x`. The construction is in LOGSPACE. So CVP is P-complete w.r.t. LOGSPACE-reductions.
- This is a good example of a LOGSPACE-reduction, being a good benchmark for the LF programming language and for the circuit description language
- The problem is that we can't generate tests for it; we have no database of Turing machines descriptions

# Concrete Turing Machines
- How to obtain definitions of concrete Turing machines, with transitions stated explicitly etc.?
- Small deterministic Turing machines: [@KUDLEK1996241]
- Small universal Turing machines: [@ROGOZHIN1996215]
- Verified programming of Turing machines in Coq Forster: [@10.1145/3372885.3373816]
- Formalizing Turing machines: [@10.1007/978-3-642-32621-9_1]


# FNP class
- https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/71617/function-problems-and-fp-subseteq-fnp
- https://cstheory.stackexchange.com/questions/37812/what-exactly-are-the-classes-fp-fnp-and-tfnp
- https://complexityzoo.net/Complexity_Zoo:F#fp


# References {.allowframebreaks}
